So there are two categories of exceptions.
We have checked and
we have unchecked exceptions.
So the signature of the createNewFile
method, it specifies.
This is what it looks like.
It specifies that it
throws an IOException.
It says it right in its signature.
And so
when we tried to say file.createNewFile,
that's why we got an error, because
it already told us in its signature
that there's a possibility of
actually throwing an exception.
So that's how the compiler knew,
hey, there's a chance, right?
So we have to put that within a try block.
So that's a check,
an example of a checked exception.
But remember when we looked at the for
loop example, and
I said this will compile,
there's no anything here
that's stopping me from saying do
it while index is less than 4.
That's an unchecked exception, right?
So in this example,
the nextDouble method, for example,
on scanner, it does not specify
that it throws any exception.
And yet
if I were to say console.nextDouble, and
somebody entered a string,
then I would get this
InputMismatchException.
So this is an unchecked exception.
With unchecked exceptions,
I don't have to put these in try blocks.
I might not even know, because the method
signature didn't tell me that there's
a possibility of it throwing an exception.
So I wouldn't even know to
put it in a try block or
which exception I should even catch.
So checked exceptions are the exceptions
that are checked by the compiler before
the code is executed.
If the method says that it
throws a checked exception,
then it must declare that.
If it does it in the method,
it must declare it in its signature.
And this is the act that lets the compiler
know that any code that's gonna
call this method has to handle that
exception in some way, all right?
For unchecked exceptions,
these are not checked by the compiler.
These are runtime exceptions,
runtime meaning when it's executed.
And there's actually a class in Java
that's called runtime exception.
So runtime exception in
all of its subclasses
are considered unchecked exceptions.
These exceptions can be
thrown by a method, but
the method header does not
need to explicitly specify
that it's going to throw
one of those exceptions.
Is that clear?
All right, so methods typically
use checked exceptions when it's
reasonable that a calling method
can recover from the error, right?
So, for example, with that IOException,
If I caught that in my try-catch block,
there's something I could
do as a programmer.
I could create the directory and
then try the action again, right?
So there's things that I can do.
Versus unchecked exceptions are used
when there really isn't anything
that you can do to recover from this,
it's best it just blow up.
Now, while the unchecked exceptions
are not required to be handled,
your code can still specify them within
the catch block and do whatever you want.